# Canada_Cost_of_ClimateChange
Convex hull analysis of GCMs for Canada

@Canadian-Institute-for-Climate-Choices background files and data

INTRODUCTION
Climate change impact analyses in Canada frequently uses ensembles of 24 statistically downscaled general circulation models (GCMs) to determine the possible worlds under various emissions pathways. While the 24 model ensemble aggregate values are useful in capturing average annual changes and general trends, ensembles cannot be used to analyze variability and changes at a daily temporal scale. This is because using ensemble distribution slices to capture a range of model outputs can produce incongruent physical realities across the country and because aggregation of all 24 GCM outputs does not consistently translate to daily timeseries.

The Canadian Institute for Climate Choices is developing an analysis of climate change impacts and associated costs to Canada. The Cost of Climate Change project will require daily precipitation and temperature projections at a national scale in order to model impacts to various infrastructure systems. While the analysis seeks to capture the range of possibilities represented by various GCMs, time constrains limit the ability to individually run an analysis for each of the 24 statistically downscaled GCMs commonly used in Canada. Herein, the Institute has conducted an analysis to determine if a sample of GCMs can be used to capture the range of model outcomes that is represented in the 24 model ensemble.

Recognizing that outputs from the cost estimate from this project are intended to demonstrate the range of possible climate costs at a regional scale, there are a number of assumptions that will be used in order to project impacts and costs to 2100. As such, the objective of the model selection approach was to identify the margins of possible futures as captured by select GCMs. 

METHODS
Following the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) approach to model selection for the Climate Impact and Risk Analysis, the Institute has examined the average annual temperature and average annual precipitation changes projected by 24 GCMs in Canada. Sensitivity analysis was conducted to examine intranational variation as well as model output characteristics at a daily scale.

Average annual precipitation and average annual temperature data was obtained for 24 statistically downscaled GCMs for periods 1971-2000, 2041-2070, and 2071-2100 and for representative concentration pathways (RCPs) 4.5 and 8.5. Additionally, indices for annual days with precipitation >10mm and for 3 consecutive days with temperature >25c was obtained for the RCP 8.5 end of century scenario. Data was obtained from the Canadian Centre for Climate Services.
National analysis was conducted by calculating the delta average annual temperature and delta percent average annual precipitation for each GCM, scenario, and era. Data was plotted on a scatterplot with a y axis of percent precipitation change and x axis of degrees of temperature change. Using the EPA Locating and selecting scenarios online (LASSO) technique, a polygon was mathematically drawn around the parameter of the scatterplot, selecting the models that represented the margins of all temperature X precipitation outcomes.
 
Following the national analysis, an GCM outputs for each province and territory were examined in order to determine the spatial differences of model outcomes. This process ensured that models used for the Cost of Climate Change project would also reflect the range of possible outcomes at a regional scale. For the regional analysis, boundaries of each jurisdiction were used to cut the baseline and future GCM outputs prior to determining the delta. Gridded cells were only included that were fully within the jurisdictional boundaries. Results were then analyzed using the LASSO process (figure 2).
  
Since the Cost of Climate Change project will be using daily level precipitation and temperature data, it was important that daily variability was analyzed and captured by the selected models. Herein, indices of extreme precipitation and extreme temperature were used to determine the range of projected outcomes. This analysis was only conduced at a national level for RCP 8.5 and for the end of century timeframe. The scatterplot and LASSO technique was similarly used to analyze results (Figure 3).
  
RESULTS
The parameter GCMs for each analysis were compared across temporal (eras of 2041-2070, 2071-2100) and spatial (national and province and territory) scales. We tabulated the number of times each model was selected in the analysis. This led to the selection of 7 models that can be effectively used to represent the range of model projections for Canada. These models align with the analysis of interannual variability. We examined each scatter plot then to confirm that even for the scenario or era where a peripheral model was not selected, there was an adequate representation of high temperature and low precipitation, high temperature and high precipitation, low temperature and high precipitation, and low temperature and low precipitation outcomes.
